---
author: Amirreza
layout: post
title: Learning Qt and QML
categories: [Software Development]
tags: [UI Design, User Interface, Qt, GUI, c++]
---

In this post, I would be talking about Qt topics that I've found useful and tricky to understand. 
Also, I would like to write about some C++ tricks, as well.

## Qt starting recipe
1. Include the `QApplication` or `QGuiApplication`
2. Second, We need a class inheriting from `QWidget`. (*Alternatively you could use a mainwindow, so include a `QMainWindow`*)
3. Third, you can use old practice of working with this QWidget, or you can create and work with a `.ui` file.(and play with this in the **Qt Designer**). To create a `.ui` file, do:
   1. create a new file named something, e.g. `foo.ui`
   2. in your .h file of QWidget file, add these two:
        ```c++
        namespace Ui{
        class mainWindow;
        }; 
        class mainWindow: QWdiget /*or QMainwindow*/{
            mainWindow(QWidget *parent = nullptr)
            ...
            private:
                Ui::mainWindow ui;
        }
        ```
    3. In the corresponding implementation cpp file:
        ```c++
        #include "./ui_foo.h"
        ...
        mainWindow::mainWindow(QWidget *parent) : QWidget(parent){
            ui.setupUi(this);
        }
        ```

### Including .ui file:
- first read this [getting started](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/designer-using-a-ui-file.html#using-a-member-variable)
- You have basically two options:
- 1. adding `testingUI.ui` file directly into your `main.cpp` file 
    To do this, you need to write:
    ```c++
    #include "ui_testingUI.h" // not an actual header file
    int main(){
        ...
        Ui::testingUI ui;
        ui.setupUi(new Qwidget());
        ui.show();
        ...
    }
    ```
    2. Adding some code to the `.ui` file, (i.e. making it intercatible) and **then** add it to the `main.cpp` file!

### A critical Error in QT-creator
- ~~When you initialize \*\*any project\*\* in QT, there will be some errors. What you need to do is just unsetting `CMAKE_PROJECT_INCLUDE_BEFORE`. WEIRD!!!~~

### SQL databases in Qt
- Firstly read this: https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/sql-programming.html
- add sql qt package to cmakelists.txt
- for using `QSQLITE`, use this: 
   ```c++
   QSqlDatabase db = QSqlDatabase::addDatabase("QSQLITE");
   db.setDatabaseName(QStandardPaths::writableLocation(QStandardPaths::RuntimeLocation).append("/generatedData.db");
   db.open();
   ```
- for executing query on it, do this: 
    ```c++
    QSqlQuery query;
    query.exec("SQL_COMMANDS");
    ```
- For modifying records in a table (e.g. `ContainerJobs`), you can use 2 options:
  - Through query:
    - To use a binding variable in the query, use this command: 
     ```c++
     query.prepare("insert into ContainerJobs (QC, indx, verticalLoc, Type) values (:QC, :indx, :verticalLoc, :Type)");
     query.bindValue(":QC", "m1");
     ...
     query.exec();
     ```
  - Through `QSqlTableModel sqlmod` (I like this more!)
    - To do this: You first need a `QTableView` in your QWdiget or ui code/file for adding the `QSqlTableModel`  to it as its model (`setmodel`)
    - then you need a `QSqlTableModel m = QSqlTableModel(this, QSqlDatabase)`, remember, `this` should a `QObject`, hence, QWidgets are ok with it.
    - Then you need a `QSqlRecord rec` for adding records to `m`
    - Then for adding fields (or columns), you need to use `QSqlField` and for adding a specific type, equivalent to what is defined in the table of the original of the data base, you need to add the following code: 
    ```c++
    rec.append(QSqlField("QC", QMetaType::fromType<QString>())); 
    ```
    - finally, after adding all the columns to the record, you need to `setValue(0,"m1");`, first argument denoting as the n-th field.
    - then you just need to` sqlmod.insertRecord(1,rec);`, first argument denoting the n-th record on the table.
    - Fianlly, you need to do `sqlmod.submitAll();` and `sqlmod.transaction();` and `sqlmod.commit();` and `QTableView::setModel(sqlMod);`
#### Singleton design and "correct" way of using of QSqlDatabases
- read this very important topic on qt forum ([link](https://forum.qt.io/topic/160987/qsqldatabase-correct-usage))

### Debugging tips:
- Remember to check the `Locals` in the `Views` option of the debugger to view the variables and user defined objects.
- Be careful about **`#include` guards**. Remember to add `#pragma once` in the beginning of the `.h` files to avoid **double inclusion**.
- Alternatively, you can do this:
  ```c++
     #ifndef BBDEFS_H
     #define BBDEFS_H
     ...
     #endif // BBDEFS_H
   ```

### Running Qt project outside QtCreator 
To do so, you have two options (according to this [stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/28732602/qt-example-executables-wont-run-missing-qt5cored-dll)):
1. copy all the dlls into your build directory (tedious!)
2. just add the dlls to the `PATH` environment variable. (they are often located in bin)
3. Or, for non visual studio projects, you use the `windeployment` of the Qt.

## C++ Tips
- For copying: one object or resource into another (possibly with different types), use **move semantics** which is related to **rvalue refrences** for performance optimization.
